---
layout: post
title: "Navigating Your First Technical Internship"
author: "Tom Wright"
tags:
    - Internship
comments: false
---


First and foremost, congratulations on landing your first technical
internship! After hours of fine-tuning your resume, countless cover
letters written, and (if you are in the same boat I was in) having faced
your fair share of rejections, you've made it. Before digging into the
rest of this post, take a moment to be proud of the work you've put in
and appreciate where it has led you. If perhaps you are reading this in
the middle of your application process and are yet to receive an offer,
don't worry. The first summer I applied for technical internships, out
of roughly 20 applications sent, I received a single interview and zero
offers. It never feels like it is going to happen until it does. Here's
a [[useful
guide]{.ul}](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-to-land-a-top-notch-tech-job-as-a-student-5c97fec82f3d/)
if you're looking for tips on the application process.

Hopefully the advice that follows in this post will give you some
insight that helps you make a strong impression in the first few weeks
of your internship. Some more technical subjects or toolkits will be
mentioned for the sake of example, but we won't get into the details of
these in this post. There are plenty of online resources that provide
great introductions to
[[git]{.ul}](https://guides.github.com/introduction/git-handbook/),
[[the
cloud]{.ul}](https://www.zdnet.com/article/what-is-cloud-computing-everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-cloud/),
and countless other new topics you might encounter.

## Before you start

The most important thing you can do leading up to your internship is try
to relax. It's common to feel a nervous excitement as your first day
approaches. Remember that you will have plenty of time (give or take 40
hours per week) to focus on this soon enough. Take the time to enjoy
other hobbies or interests while you have the time.

If all distractions fail, a great way to spend any built up excitement
is to do some research. You likely already have a good sense of what the
company does, the general culture and what your role might entail from
the application and interview processes. Feel free to dig deeper into
these topics. See if there's information on the company website about
your coworkers, the impact your work might drive and the industry as a
whole. This will help you feel more prepared when you start, as well as
settle some jitters in the weeks leading up.

## Hitting the ground running

The day has finally arrived, you've made it! Surely your first week will
be filled with lots of meetings, introductions, and learning. My advice
for this information overload is about as basic as it gets: **take
notes, and lots of them**. Ironically, being a software engineer, I am a
big fan of handwriting my notes. I also think it looks better from the
perspective of the person speaking to see someone writing notes by hand
versus typing away at a laptop, unable to see the screen.

In the same vein, any buzzwords you hear (any term, phrase, acronym or
title that you don't fully understand) should be added to a personal
dictionary. This was really important for me, and I made reference to it
weekly throughout my 8 month internship. You should keep this up
throughout the entire internship, however the first two weeks is likely
when it will grow the most. *What is a Docker container and what makes
them helpful? Who knows what \[insert some arbitrary industry acronym
here\] stands for?* These are questions that are super easy to answer by
asking coworkers or even the internet. Maintaining your own shortlist of
important definitions will help fast track your learning and be a great
tool to pass along to new interns that join during your stay.

One of the best ways you can get to know the company and those you are
working with is simply to **reach out to your coworkers**. This can be
challenging depending on the size of the company you are with. It
becomes even more intimidating if you are in the middle of a global
pandemic and are onboarding from home. Try connecting via Slack, email
or set up calls to get to know those both in and outside of your team.
Learning about the different teams, individuals' career paths and
building your network is one of the best ways to make the most of your
internship, both personally and professionally. Reaching out like this
can be intimidating, especially early on, but it will show that you are
interested in the company as a whole and highlight that you have strong
initiative. People generally are more than happy to talk about their
work and personal interests. There is no reason not to start this during
your first couple weeks.

## The Bulk

Throughout my internship, I discovered three main takeaways that should
be considered by anyone working through an internship, especially if it
is your first.

### 1. Who is this imposter?

Imposter Syndrome is the feeling of doubting your own skills,
accomplishments and thinking of yourself as some kind of fraud. For me,
this manifested itself as a stream of questions such as *When will they
realize they've made a huge mistake in hiring me?* and thoughts similar
to *I am definitely not smart enough for this!* Temper this by
remembering **they hired you for a reason**. After interviewing many
candidates and having spent hours speaking to you and testing your
skills, they picked you. This reminder certainly won't make all these
anxieties disappear, but can hopefully help mitigate any unnecessary
stress. Being a little nervous can help motivate you to work hard and
push you to succeed. It is worth remembering that all your coworkers
likely went through the same experience, or even still feel this way
from time to time. Feel free to get their insights or experience with
this if you feel comfortable doing so.

These thoughts and feelings might start well before your first day and
last well into the internship itself, as they did in my case. It will
definitely improve with time and experience. Until that happens just
remember to use your available sources of support and try to translate
it into motivation.

### 2. Asking for help

A big fear I had during my internship was coming across as naive and
inexperienced. I was very worried about asking a question and getting
"*How do you not know that? Don't you know anything*?" as a response.
While this is certainly a normal thought process, it is misguided for a
few reasons. First off, my coworkers are great people, as I am sure are
yours. The odds of someone saying that are slim to none, and if they do,
it tells you a lot more about them than it does about you. Secondly, and
this is an important thing to keep in mind: **no one expects you to know
everything and be great at everything,** especially early on as an
intern. Asking questions is an important part of learning and
internships are no exception. This one comes in two parts: *when* to ask
for help and *how* to ask for help.

Let me save you the time I wasted trying to figure out when is the
perfect point to ask a question. While you definitely do not want to
just ask before thinking or doing any digging yourself, no one wants you
endlessly spinning your wheels. Take the time to think about the
problem, see if there are any reliable resources or answers in some
documentation, attempt a couple of solutions, but don't fuss until the
end of time out of fear of looking dumb.

How you ask for help is the easy one. You've done all the work already.
Avoid questions like "*Hey how do you do \[insert problem\]?*", or even
worse "*Hey I know this is probably SUPER stupid but I don't get
\[insert problem here\] haha!*". Do say something along the lines of
"*Hey \[insert name\]. I have been trying to figure out how to solve
\[insert problem\] and seem to be stuck. I have tried \[insert attempted
solutions\] with no success and was hoping you could point me in the
right direction.*" You can also frame it as a leading question, such as
"*So in order to do X, we have to do Y because of Z*?" It doesn't have
to be a lengthy breakdown of every thought you had, it really shouldn't
be. People generally prefer concise messages, just show that you have
put some thought and effort into it.

### 3. Make your voice heard 

The scope of this point may vary depending on the size of your company,
its culture and your role, however, the point remains the same. Share
your thoughts on what you are working on. Share what interests you as
subjects, both within and outside your role.

I had the incredible opportunity to contribute to my organization in
ways beyond the scope of my title. Yes, this is because of the
supportive nature of the company and the flexibility that comes with
working at a smaller organization, but it also would not have happened
had I not shared what I am interested in. I gained fantastic experience
in my role, but also developed an appreciation and better understanding
for other work being done at the company.

Share your thoughts at the weekly team meeting, don't be afraid to
review code or improve documentation and bounce ideas off coworkers
during coffee breaks (oh, try not to drink [too]{.ul} much coffee). They
hired you in large part for your brain, don't be afraid to use it!

## Final Impressions

You've made it to the final few weeks of your internship, congrats!
Hopefully you have had a fantastic experience, learning a lot and making
lasting relationships. Now is the time to think of who you would like to
connect with for a chat or call before you finish. This can be for any
number of reasons; giving a little extra thanks, asking for career
advice or even just for the sake of saying farewell to the friends
you've made along the way!

Regardless of whether or not you follow any of this advice, I wish you
the best of luck in your internship. While the advice above worked well
for me, it is by no means a one-size-fits-all magical recipe to the
perfect internship. There will certainly be hurdles along the way,
anxieties to overcome, and inevitable mistakes made, all of which will
contribute to making your internship a great learning experience. Good
luck and enjoy the ride.
